driver-core/Upgrade_guide_to_2.1.rst, before:

Upgrade Guide to 2.1.0
======================

The purpose of this guide is to detail the changes made by version 2.1 of
the Java Driver that are relevant to an upgrade from version 2.0. This guide
only describes breaking changes of the API, added features are not covered.

Note that almost all breaking changes are compile time ones (the one exception
being the minor change to ``TableMetadata#Options#getIndexInterval``, see point
4). If you upgrade to version 2.1 from version 2.0 and your application
compiles, you can ignore this guide.


Breaking API Changes
--------------------

1. The ``serialize`` and ``deserialize`` methods in ``DataType`` now take an
   additional parameter: the protocol version. As explained in the javadoc,
   if unsure, the proper value to use for this parameter is the protocol version
   in use by the driver, i.e. the value returned by
   ``cluster.getConfiguration().getProtocolOptions().getProtocolVersion()``.

2. The ``parse`` method in ``DataType`` now returns a Java object, not a
   ``ByteBuffer``. The previous behavior can be obtained by calling the
   ``serialize`` method on the returned object.

3. The ``getValues`` method of ``RegularStatement`` now takes the protocol
   version as a parameter. As above, the proper value if unsure is almost surely
   the protocol version in use
   (``cluster.getConfiguration().getProtocolOptions().getProtocolVersion()``).

4. The ``getCaching`` method of ``TableMetadata#Options`` now returns a
   ``Map`` to account for changes to Cassandra 2.1. Also, the
   ``getIndexInterval`` method now returns an ``Integer`` instead of an ``int``
   which will be ``null`` when connected to Cassandra 2.1 nodes.

Commit message:

Separate end-user and "internal" changes in the upgrade guide.

driver-core/Upgrade_guide_to_2.1.rst, after:

Upgrade Guide to 2.1.0
======================

The purpose of this guide is to detail the changes made by version 2.1 of
the Java Driver that are relevant to an upgrade from version 2.0. This guide
only describes breaking changes of the API, added features are not covered.

Note that almost all breaking changes are compile time ones (the one exception
being the minor change to ``TableMetadata#Options#getIndexInterval``, see point
1). If you upgrade to version 2.1 from version 2.0 and your application
compiles, you can ignore this guide.


User API Changes
----------------

1. The ``getCaching`` method of ``TableMetadata#Options`` now returns a
   ``Map`` to account for changes to Cassandra 2.1. Also, the
   ``getIndexInterval`` method now returns an ``Integer`` instead of an ``int``
   which will be ``null`` when connected to Cassandra 2.1 nodes.


Internal API Changes
--------------------

The changes listed in this section should normally not impact end users of the
driver, but rather third-party frameworks and tools.

2. The ``serialize`` and ``deserialize`` methods in ``DataType`` now take an
   additional parameter: the protocol version. As explained in the javadoc,
   if unsure, the proper value to use for this parameter is the protocol version
   in use by the driver, i.e. the value returned by
   ``cluster.getConfiguration().getProtocolOptions().getProtocolVersion()``.

3. The ``parse`` method in ``DataType`` now returns a Java object, not a
   ``ByteBuffer``. The previous behavior can be obtained by calling the
   ``serialize`` method on the returned object.

4. The ``getValues`` method of ``RegularStatement`` now takes the protocol
   version as a parameter. As above, the proper value if unsure is almost surely
   the protocol version in use
   (``cluster.getConfiguration().getProtocolOptions().getProtocolVersion()``).
