driver-core/Upgrade_guide_to_2.0.rst, before:

Upgrade Guide to 2.0.0
======================

The purpose of this guide is to detail the changes made by the version 2.0 of
the Java Driver that are relevant to an upgrade from version 1.0. The first
part goes into the breaking changes made to the API (upgrader from 1.0 should
be especially attentive to that section) while the second one lists notewhorthy
but backward breaking changes.


Breaking API Changes
--------------------

The following describes the changes for 2.0 that are breaking changes of the
1.0 API. Upgrader from 1.0 should pay particular attention to this list even
though not all applications will be impacted by those changes.

1. The Query class has been renamed into Statement (it was confusing to some
   that "BoundStatement" was not a "Statement"). To allow this, the old
   Statement class has been renamed to RegularStatement.

2. The RegularStatement class (ex-Statement class, see above) must now
   implement two additional methods: RegularStatement#getKeyspace and
   RegularStatement#getValues. If you had extended this class, you will have to
   implement those new methods, but both can return null if they are not useful
   in your case.

3. The Metadata#getReplicas method now takes 2 arguments. On top of the
   partition key, you must now provide the keyspace too. The previous behavior
   was buggy: it's impossible to properly return the full list of replica for a
   partition key without knowing the keyspace since replication may depend on
   the keyspace).

4. The method LoadBalancingPolicy#newQueryPlan() method now takes the currently
   logged keyspace as 2nd argument. This information is necessary to do proper
   token aware balancing (see preceding point).

5. NoHostAvaiableException#getErrors now returns the full exception objects for
   each node instead of just a message. In other words, it returns a
   Map<InetAddress, Throwable> instead of a Map<InetAddress, String>.

6. Statement#getConsistencyLevel (previously Query#getConsistencyLevel, see
   first point) will now return null by default (instead of CL.ONE), with the
   meaning of "use the default consistency level". The default consistency
   level can now be configured through the new QueryOptions object in the
   cluster Configuration.

7. The deprecated since 1.0.2 Host.HealtMonitor class has been removed. You
   will now need to use Host#isUp and Cluster#register if you were using that
   class.

8. The Cluster.Initializer interface should now implement 2 new methods:
   Cluster.Initializer#getInitialListeners (which can return an empty
   collection) and Cluster.Initializer#getClusterName (which can return null).

9. The Metrics class now uses the Codahale metrics library version 3 (version 2 was
   used previously). That new major version of the library has many API changes
   (http://metrics.codahale.com/about/release-notes/ as some details) compared
   to its version 2, which can thus impact consumers of the Metrics class.
   Furthermore, the default JmxReporter now includes a name specific to the
   cluster instance (to avoid conflicts when multiple Cluster instances are created
   in the same JVM). As a result, tools that were polling JMX informations will
   have to be updated accordingly.

10. The Cluster and Session shutdown API has changed. There is now only one
    shutdown method that is asynchronous but return a Future on the completion
    of shutdown. Also, shutdown now waits for ongoing queries to complete by
    default (but you can force the closing of all connections if you want to).

11. The ResultSetFuture#set and ResultSetFuture#setException methods have been
    removed (from the public API at least). They were never meant to be exposed
    publicly: a resultSetFuture is always set by the driver itself and should
    not be set manually.

12. Creating a Cluster instance (through Cluster#buildFrom or the
    Cluster.Builder#build method) does not create any connection right away
    anymore (and thus cannot throw a NoHostAvailableException or an
    AuthenticationException). Instead, the initial contact points are checked
    the first time a call to Cluster#connect is done. If for some reason you
    want to emulate the previous behavior, you can use the new method
    Cluster#init: Cluster.builder().build() in 1.0 is equivalent to
    Cluster.builder().build().init() in 2.0.

13. The UnavailableException#getConsistency method has been renamed to
    UnavailableException#getConsistencyLevel for consistency with the method of
    QueryTimeoutException.

14. The QueryBuilder#raw method does not automatically add quotes anymore, but
    rather ouptut its result without an change (as the raw name implies). This
    means for instance that eq("x", raw(foo)) will output "x = foo", not
    "x = 'foo'" (you don't need the raw method to output the latter string).

15. The QueryBuilder#in method now has the following special case: using
    QueryBuilder.in(QueryBuilder.bindMarker()) will generate the string "IN ?",
    not "IN (?)" as was the case in 1.0. While the former syntax is not
    currently valid, it will be once https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/CASSANDRA-4210
    is solved. When that is the case, the "IN ?" syntax will be a lot more
    useful than "IN (?)",  as the latter can more simply use an equality. Note
    that if you really want to output "IN (?)" with the query builder, you can
    use QueryBuilder.in(QueryBuilder.raw("?")).

16. When setting by names in BoundStatement (setX(String, X) methods), if more than
    one variables have the same name, then all values corresponding to that variable
    name are set instead of just the first occurrence.


Non-breaking API Changes
------------------------

This section details the biggest additions to 2.0 API wise. It is not an
exhaustive list of new features in 2.0.

1. The new BatchStatement class allows to group any type of insertion Statement
   (BoundStatement or RegularStatement) for execution as a batch. For instance,
   you can do something like:
       List<String> values = ...;
       PreparedStatement ps = session.prepare("INSERT INTO myTable(value) VALUES (?)");
       BatchStatement bs = new BatchStatement();
       for (String value : values)
           bs.add(ps.bind(value));
       session.execute(bs);

2. SimpleStatement can now take a list of values in addtion to the query. This
   allows to do the equivalent of a prepare+execute but in only one round-trip
   to the server and without keeping the prepared statement after the
   execution. This is typically useful if a given query should be executed only
   once (i.e. you don't want to prepare it) but you also don't want to
   serialize all values into strings. Shortcut Session#execute() and
   Session#executeAsync() methods are also provided so you that you can do:
       String imgName = ...;
       ByteBuffer imgBytes = ...;
       session.execute("INSERT INTO images(name, bytes) VALUES (?, ?)", imgName, imgBytes);

3. SELECT queries are now "paged" under the hood. In other words, if a query
   yield a very large result, only the beginning of the ResultSet will be fetch
   initially, the rest being fetch "on-demand". In parctice, this means that:
       for (Row r : session.execute("SELECT * FROM myTable"))
           ... process r ...
   should not timeout or OOM the server anymore even if myTable contains a lot
   of data. In general paging should be transparent for the application (as in
   the example above), but the implementation provides a number of knobs to
   fine tune the behavior of that paging: the size of each "page" can be
   set per-query (Statement#setFetchSize()) and the ResultSet object provides
   2 methods to check the state of paging (ResultSet#getAvailableWithoutFetching
   and ResultSet#isFullyFetched) as well as a mean to force the pre-fetching of
   the next page (ResultSet#fetchMoreResults).

Commit message:

Make query builder use values when it makes sense

driver-core/Upgrade_guide_to_2.0.rst, after:

Upgrade Guide to 2.0.0
======================

The purpose of this guide is to detail the changes made by the version 2.0 of
the Java Driver that are relevant to an upgrade from version 1.0. The first
part goes into the breaking changes made to the API (upgrader from 1.0 should
be especially attentive to that section) while the second one lists notewhorthy
but backward breaking changes.


Breaking API Changes
--------------------

The following describes the changes for 2.0 that are breaking changes of the
1.0 API. Upgrader from 1.0 should pay particular attention to this list even
though not all applications will be impacted by those changes.

1. The Query class has been renamed into Statement (it was confusing to some
   that "BoundStatement" was not a "Statement"). To allow this, the old
   Statement class has been renamed to RegularStatement.

2. The RegularStatement class (ex-Statement class, see above) must now
   implement two additional methods: RegularStatement#getKeyspace and
   RegularStatement#getValues. If you had extended this class, you will have to
   implement those new methods, but both can return null if they are not useful
   in your case.

3. The Metadata#getReplicas method now takes 2 arguments. On top of the
   partition key, you must now provide the keyspace too. The previous behavior
   was buggy: it's impossible to properly return the full list of replica for a
   partition key without knowing the keyspace since replication may depend on
   the keyspace).

4. The method LoadBalancingPolicy#newQueryPlan() method now takes the currently
   logged keyspace as 2nd argument. This information is necessary to do proper
   token aware balancing (see preceding point).

5. NoHostAvaiableException#getErrors now returns the full exception objects for
   each node instead of just a message. In other words, it returns a
   Map<InetAddress, Throwable> instead of a Map<InetAddress, String>.

6. Statement#getConsistencyLevel (previously Query#getConsistencyLevel, see
   first point) will now return null by default (instead of CL.ONE), with the
   meaning of "use the default consistency level". The default consistency
   level can now be configured through the new QueryOptions object in the
   cluster Configuration.

7. The deprecated since 1.0.2 Host.HealtMonitor class has been removed. You
   will now need to use Host#isUp and Cluster#register if you were using that
   class.

8. The Cluster.Initializer interface should now implement 2 new methods:
   Cluster.Initializer#getInitialListeners (which can return an empty
   collection) and Cluster.Initializer#getClusterName (which can return null).

9. The Metrics class now uses the Codahale metrics library version 3 (version 2 was
   used previously). That new major version of the library has many API changes
   (http://metrics.codahale.com/about/release-notes/ as some details) compared
   to its version 2, which can thus impact consumers of the Metrics class.
   Furthermore, the default JmxReporter now includes a name specific to the
   cluster instance (to avoid conflicts when multiple Cluster instances are created
   in the same JVM). As a result, tools that were polling JMX informations will
   have to be updated accordingly.

10. The Cluster and Session shutdown API has changed. There is now only one
    shutdown method that is asynchronous but return a Future on the completion
    of shutdown. Also, shutdown now waits for ongoing queries to complete by
    default (but you can force the closing of all connections if you want to).

11. The ResultSetFuture#set and ResultSetFuture#setException methods have been
    removed (from the public API at least). They were never meant to be exposed
    publicly: a resultSetFuture is always set by the driver itself and should
    not be set manually.

12. Creating a Cluster instance (through Cluster#buildFrom or the
    Cluster.Builder#build method) does not create any connection right away
    anymore (and thus cannot throw a NoHostAvailableException or an
    AuthenticationException). Instead, the initial contact points are checked
    the first time a call to Cluster#connect is done. If for some reason you
    want to emulate the previous behavior, you can use the new method
    Cluster#init: Cluster.builder().build() in 1.0 is equivalent to
    Cluster.builder().build().init() in 2.0.

13. The UnavailableException#getConsistency method has been renamed to
    UnavailableException#getConsistencyLevel for consistency with the method of
    QueryTimeoutException.

14. The QueryBuilder#raw method does not automatically add quotes anymore, but
    rather ouptut its result without an change (as the raw name implies). This
    means for instance that eq("x", raw(foo)) will output "x = foo", not
    "x = 'foo'" (you don't need the raw method to output the latter string).

15. The QueryBuilder#in method now has the following special case: using
    QueryBuilder.in(QueryBuilder.bindMarker()) will generate the string "IN ?",
    not "IN (?)" as was the case in 1.0. While the former syntax is not
    currently valid, it will be once https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/CASSANDRA-4210
    is solved. When that is the case, the "IN ?" syntax will be a lot more
    useful than "IN (?)",  as the latter can more simply use an equality. Note
    that if you really want to output "IN (?)" with the query builder, you can
    use QueryBuilder.in(QueryBuilder.raw("?")).

16. When setting by names in BoundStatement (setX(String, X) methods), if more than
    one variables have the same name, then all values corresponding to that variable
    name are set instead of just the first occurrence.

17. The querybuilder will now sometime use the new ability to send value as
    bytes instead of serializing everything to string. In general the querybuilder
    will do the right thing, but if you were calling the getQueryString() method
    on a querybuilder Statement manually (for other reasons than to prepare a query)
    then the returned string may contain bind marker in place of some of the values
    provided (and in that case, getValues() will contain the values corresponding
    to those markers). If need be, it is possible to force the old behavior by
    using the new setForceNoValues() method.


Non-breaking API Changes
------------------------

This section details the biggest additions to 2.0 API wise. It is not an
exhaustive list of new features in 2.0.

1. The new BatchStatement class allows to group any type of insertion Statement
   (BoundStatement or RegularStatement) for execution as a batch. For instance,
   you can do something like:
       List<String> values = ...;
       PreparedStatement ps = session.prepare("INSERT INTO myTable(value) VALUES (?)");
       BatchStatement bs = new BatchStatement();
       for (String value : values)
           bs.add(ps.bind(value));
       session.execute(bs);

2. SimpleStatement can now take a list of values in addtion to the query. This
   allows to do the equivalent of a prepare+execute but in only one round-trip
   to the server and without keeping the prepared statement after the
   execution. This is typically useful if a given query should be executed only
   once (i.e. you don't want to prepare it) but you also don't want to
   serialize all values into strings. Shortcut Session#execute() and
   Session#executeAsync() methods are also provided so you that you can do:
       String imgName = ...;
       ByteBuffer imgBytes = ...;
       session.execute("INSERT INTO images(name, bytes) VALUES (?, ?)", imgName, imgBytes);

3. SELECT queries are now "paged" under the hood. In other words, if a query
   yield a very large result, only the beginning of the ResultSet will be fetch
   initially, the rest being fetch "on-demand". In parctice, this means that:
       for (Row r : session.execute("SELECT * FROM myTable"))
           ... process r ...
   should not timeout or OOM the server anymore even if myTable contains a lot
   of data. In general paging should be transparent for the application (as in
   the example above), but the implementation provides a number of knobs to
   fine tune the behavior of that paging: the size of each "page" can be
   set per-query (Statement#setFetchSize()) and the ResultSet object provides
   2 methods to check the state of paging (ResultSet#getAvailableWithoutFetching
   and ResultSet#isFullyFetched) as well as a mean to force the pre-fetching of
   the next page (ResultSet#fetchMoreResults).
