manual/query_timestamps/README.md, before:

## Query timestamps

In Cassandra, each mutation has a microsecond-precision timestamp, which
is used to order operations relative to each other.

There are various ways to assign it:

### Server-side generation

If the client does not specify any timestamp, the server will assign one
based on the time it receives the query.

This can be a problem when the order of the writes matter: with unlucky
timing (different coordinators, network latency, etc.), two successive
requests from the same client might be processed in a different order
server-side, and end up with out-of-order timestamps.

### CQL `USING TIMESTAMP`

You can explicitly provide the timestamp in your CQL query:

```java
session.execute("INSERT INTO my_table(c1, c2) values (1, 1) " +
    "USING TIMESTAMP 1432815430948040");
```

This solves the problems of server-side generation: the client has
control over the ordering of the statements it generates. On the other
hand, it puts the burden of generating timestamps on client code.

### Client-side generation

Starting with version 2.1.2 of the driver, and if [native
protocol](../native_protocol/) v3 or above is in use, a *default
timestamp* can be sent with each query.

To enable this feature, provide an instance of [TimestampGenerator][tsg]
at initialization:

```java
Cluster.builder().addContactPoint("127.0.0.1")
    .withTimestampGenerator(new AtomicMonotonicTimestampGenerator())
    .build();
```

The default is still server-side generation. So unless you explicitly
provide a generator, you get the same behavior as previous driver
versions.

In addition, you can also override the default timestamp on a
per-statement basis:

```java
Statement statement = new SimpleStatement(
    "UPDATE users SET email = 'x@y.com' where id = 1");
statement.setDefaultTimestamp(1234567890);
session.execute(statement);
```

[tsg]: http://docs.datastax.com/en/drivers/java/2.1/com/datastax/driver/core/TimestampGenerator.html

The driver ships with two implementations of `TimestampGenerator`:

1. [AtomicMonotonicTimestampGenerator][amtsg], which guarantess monotonicity of timestamps for all threads;
2. [ThreadLocalMonotonicTimestampGenerator][tlmtsg], which guarantees per-thread monotonicity of timestamps.

There is less contention using `ThreadLocalMonotonicTimestampGenerator`, but beware
that there is a risk of timestamp collision with this generator when accessed by more than one
thread; only use it when threads are not in direct competition for timestamp ties (i.e., they are executing
independent statements).

[amtsg]:  http://docs.datastax.com/en/drivers/java/2.1/com/datastax/driver/core/AtomicMonotonicTimestampGenerator.html
[tlmtsg]: http://docs.datastax.com/en/drivers/java/2.1/com/datastax/driver/core/ThreadLocalMonotonicTimestampGenerator.html

#### Accuracy

Both implementations strive to achieve microsecond resolution on a best-effort basis.
But in practice, the real accuracy of generated timestamps is largely dependent on the
granularity of the underlying operating system's clock.

For most systems, this minimum granularity is millisecond, and
the sub-millisecond part of generated timestamps is simply a counter that gets incremented
until the next clock tick, as provided by `System.currentTimeMillis()`.

On some systems, however, it is possible to have a better granularity by using a [JNR]
call to [gettimeofday]. This native call will be used when available, unless the system
property `com.datastax.driver.USE_NATIVE_CLOCK` is explicitly set to `false`.

To check what's available on your system:

* make sure your `Cluster` uses a `TimestampGenerator`;
* [configure your logging framework](../logging/) to use level `INFO` for the category
  `com.datastax.driver.core.ClockFactory`;
* look for one of the following messages at startup:

    ```
    INFO  com.datastax.driver.core.ClockFactory - Using java.lang.System clock to generate timestamps
    INFO  com.datastax.driver.core.ClockFactory - Using native clock to generate timestamps
    ```

[gettimeofday]: http://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/settimeofday.2.html
[JNR]: https://github.com/jnr/jnr-ffi

#### Monotonicity

The aforementioned implementations also guarantee
that returned timestamps will always be monotonically increasing, even if multiple updates
happen under the same millisecond.

Note that to guarantee such monotonicity, if more than one timestamp is generated
within the same microsecond, or in the event of a system clock skew, _both implementations might
return timestamps that drift out in the future_.

When this happens, the built-in generators log a periodic warning message in the category
`com.datastax.driver.core.TimestampGenerator`. See their non-default constructors for ways to control the warning
interval.

### Summary

As shown in the previous sections, there are multiple ways to provide a
timestamp, some of which overlap. The order of precedence is the
following:

1. if there is a `USING TIMESTAMP` clause in the CQL string, use that
   over anything else;
2. otherwise, if a default timestamp was set on the statement and is
   different from `Long.MIN_VALUE`, use it;
3. otherwise, if a generator is specified, invoke it and use its result
   if it is different from `Long.MIN_VALUE`;
4. otherwise, let the server assign the timestamp.

Steps 2 and 3 only apply if native protocol v3 or above is in use.

Commit message:

Document that JNR doesn't work with OSGI.

manual/query_timestamps/README.md, after:

## Query timestamps

In Cassandra, each mutation has a microsecond-precision timestamp, which
is used to order operations relative to each other.

There are various ways to assign it:

### Server-side generation

If the client does not specify any timestamp, the server will assign one
based on the time it receives the query.

This can be a problem when the order of the writes matter: with unlucky
timing (different coordinators, network latency, etc.), two successive
requests from the same client might be processed in a different order
server-side, and end up with out-of-order timestamps.

### CQL `USING TIMESTAMP`

You can explicitly provide the timestamp in your CQL query:

```java
session.execute("INSERT INTO my_table(c1, c2) values (1, 1) " +
    "USING TIMESTAMP 1432815430948040");
```

This solves the problems of server-side generation: the client has
control over the ordering of the statements it generates. On the other
hand, it puts the burden of generating timestamps on client code.

### Client-side generation

Starting with version 2.1.2 of the driver, and if [native
protocol](../native_protocol/) v3 or above is in use, a *default
timestamp* can be sent with each query.

To enable this feature, provide an instance of [TimestampGenerator][tsg]
at initialization:

```java
Cluster.builder().addContactPoint("127.0.0.1")
    .withTimestampGenerator(new AtomicMonotonicTimestampGenerator())
    .build();
```

The default is still server-side generation. So unless you explicitly
provide a generator, you get the same behavior as previous driver
versions.

In addition, you can also override the default timestamp on a
per-statement basis:

```java
Statement statement = new SimpleStatement(
    "UPDATE users SET email = 'x@y.com' where id = 1");
statement.setDefaultTimestamp(1234567890);
session.execute(statement);
```

[tsg]: http://docs.datastax.com/en/drivers/java/2.1/com/datastax/driver/core/TimestampGenerator.html

The driver ships with two implementations of `TimestampGenerator`:

1. [AtomicMonotonicTimestampGenerator][amtsg], which guarantess monotonicity of timestamps for all threads;
2. [ThreadLocalMonotonicTimestampGenerator][tlmtsg], which guarantees per-thread monotonicity of timestamps.

There is less contention using `ThreadLocalMonotonicTimestampGenerator`, but beware
that there is a risk of timestamp collision with this generator when accessed by more than one
thread; only use it when threads are not in direct competition for timestamp ties (i.e., they are executing
independent statements).

[amtsg]:  http://docs.datastax.com/en/drivers/java/2.1/com/datastax/driver/core/AtomicMonotonicTimestampGenerator.html
[tlmtsg]: http://docs.datastax.com/en/drivers/java/2.1/com/datastax/driver/core/ThreadLocalMonotonicTimestampGenerator.html

#### Accuracy

Both implementations strive to achieve microsecond resolution on a best-effort basis.
But in practice, the real accuracy of generated timestamps is largely dependent on the
granularity of the underlying operating system's clock.

For most systems, this minimum granularity is millisecond, and
the sub-millisecond part of generated timestamps is simply a counter that gets incremented
until the next clock tick, as provided by `System.currentTimeMillis()`.

On some systems, however, it is possible to have a better granularity by using a [JNR]
call to [gettimeofday]. This native call will be used when available, unless the system
property `com.datastax.driver.USE_NATIVE_CLOCK` is explicitly set to `false`.

To check what's available on your system:

* make sure your `Cluster` uses a `TimestampGenerator`;
* [configure your logging framework](../logging/) to use level `INFO` for the category
  `com.datastax.driver.core.ClockFactory`;
* look for one of the following messages at startup:

    ```
    INFO  com.datastax.driver.core.ClockFactory - Using java.lang.System clock to generate timestamps
    INFO  com.datastax.driver.core.ClockFactory - Using native clock to generate timestamps
    ```

Note: currently, native calls won't work from an OSGI container. This is because JNR artifacts don't include proper OSGI
descriptors. This will be fixed in an upcoming version (see
[JAVA-1127](https://datastax-oss.atlassian.net/browse/JAVA-1127)).

[gettimeofday]: http://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/settimeofday.2.html
[JNR]: https://github.com/jnr/jnr-ffi

#### Monotonicity

The aforementioned implementations also guarantee
that returned timestamps will always be monotonically increasing, even if multiple updates
happen under the same millisecond.

Note that to guarantee such monotonicity, if more than one timestamp is generated
within the same microsecond, or in the event of a system clock skew, _both implementations might
return timestamps that drift out in the future_.

When this happens, the built-in generators log a periodic warning message in the category
`com.datastax.driver.core.TimestampGenerator`. See their non-default constructors for ways to control the warning
interval.

### Summary

As shown in the previous sections, there are multiple ways to provide a
timestamp, some of which overlap. The order of precedence is the
following:

1. if there is a `USING TIMESTAMP` clause in the CQL string, use that
   over anything else;
2. otherwise, if a default timestamp was set on the statement and is
   different from `Long.MIN_VALUE`, use it;
3. otherwise, if a generator is specified, invoke it and use its result
   if it is different from `Long.MIN_VALUE`;
4. otherwise, let the server assign the timestamp.

Steps 2 and 3 only apply if native protocol v3 or above is in use.
